\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename BuildInstructions


Featured,Phase-Deploy,Phase-Implementation How to build Rhythmos from sources.@settitle Download
@c %**end of header

@node Top

 Use git to clone a copy of the source tree. 
@example$ git clone http://code.google.com/p/rhythmos/@end example
 Go to the @uref{http://code.google.com/p/rhythmos/source/checkout, RhythmOS source} page for more info.@settitle Configure
@c %**end of header

@node Top

 From the top level project directory execute the @code{configure} script. 
@example$ ./configure@end example
 Install any missing programs that @code{configure} recommends. @settitle Build
@c %**end of header

@node Top

 After @code{configure} is run a @code{Makefile} is generated. From the top level project directory run 
@examplemake'.@end example


$ make@settitle Running
@c %**end of header

@node Top

 If you just want to run it and don't care how it does it then type: 
@example$ make run@end example


Rhythmos can be simulated with QEMU a couple of different ways:

@strong{1.} Using QEMU as the bootloader. Pass QEMU the built kernel image @code{src/kernel.img} and the file system image @code{src/filesystem.img}. 
@example$ qemu -kernel src/kernel.img -initrd src/filesystem.img@end example


@strong{2.} Build a bootable floppy image that uses grub as the bootloader. There is a one already created for you in the source tree. Just pass QEMU the floppy image: directly use the command below. 
@example$ qemu -fda src/grub.img@end example
 The @code{make run} target also boots using a floppy image with grub as the bootlader, but it first creates a fresh image before booting.

To regenerate the @code{grub.img} because the ramdisk and/or the the kernel image was updated the 
@examplegrub.img' make target will do this for you.@end example


$ make grub.img Then use method 2 to boot from it.

See documentation in the source for more specifics.
@contents
@bye
